---
---

# 3.1, 3.2, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3 Vocab

Major | Word | Definition
--- | --- | ---
1| biosphere | part of earth in which life exists, including land, water, and air or atmosphere (78)
2| ecology | the scientific study of interactions among organisms and between organisms and their environment (78)
3| species | a group of similar organisms that can breed and produce fertile offspring (79)
4| population | groups of individuals of the same species that live in the same area (79)
5| community | an assemblage of different populations that live together in a defined area (79)
6| ecosystem | all the organisms that live in a place, together witht heir physical environment (79)
7| biotic factor | any living part of the environment with which an organism might interact (81)
8| abiotic factor | nonliving parts of the environment that shapes an ecosystem (81)
9| atmosphere | all gases that surround the Earth (82)
10| hydrosphere | all water on earth, including water vapo, rain, underground water, and ice. (82)
11| geosphere | all of earth's usual solids, including magma (82)
12| weather | short-term changes in temperature, precipitation, clouds, and wind. (85)
13| climate | long-term changes in temperature, precipitation, clouds, wind, and extreme weather events (85)
14| greenhouse effect | an increase in the Earth's temperture from gases that trap heat (86)
15| autotroph | an organism that makes its own food
16| primary producer | an organism that produces and stores food for other organisms.
17| photosynthesis | a process used by plants and other autotrophs to capture light energy and use it to power chemical reactions that convert carbon dioxide and water into oxygen and energy-rich carbohydrates such as sugars and starches (114, 297)
18| chemosynthesis | a process used by autotrophs that produces carbohydrates from chemicals.
19| heterotroph | an organism that obtains food by consuming other living things; consumer (116, 285)
20| consumer | an organism that consumes other living things; heterotroph
21| detritus | small pieces of dead and decaying plant and animal remains.
22| food chain | a series of organisms in which energy is transferred from one organism to another (118).
23| photoplankton | a tiny floating algae that are present in aquatic ecosystems as primary producers (118).
24| food web | a network that includes multiple food chains.
25| trophic level | a step in a food chain or web.
26| ecological pyramid | a model that represents the amount of energy or matter contained within each trophic level in a food chain or web (121).
27| biomass | The total amount of living tissue in a trophic level (122).
28| biogechemical cycle | a cycle that constantly recycles matter through the biosphere (123).
29| nutrient | elements that organisms need to sustain life (126).
30| carbon reservoir | a place where carbon is stored (126).
31| nitrogen fixation | the process used by certain bacteria of converting nitrogen gas into ammonia (131).
32| denitrification | the processs used by some bacteria that involves obtaining energy by converting nitrates into nitrogen gas (131).
33| limiting nutrient | a nutrient which supply limits productivity (132).